tetragon: trace kernel modules operations (#1390)
cilium/tetragon: docs/content/en/docs/use-cases/host-system-changes/linux-kernel-modules.md

---
title: "Monitor Linux Kernel Modules"
weight: 1
icon: "overview"
description: "Monitor Linux Kernel Modules operations"
---

# Monitoring Kernel Modules operations

Monitoring kernel modules helps to identify processes that load kernel modules to add features,
to the operating system, to alter host system functionality or even hide their behaviour.

The [monitor-kernel-modules](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-kernel-modules.yaml) tracing policy can be used to answer the following questions:

> > Which process or container is changing the kernel?

Reviewer: Not clear what this means. Changing the kernel in what manner? I believe that this PR is about modules, and the next 2 bullets cover all aspects of module loading/unloading.

Author: It just means we inserted code into kernel, it was changed, this is not the same kernel that was booted.

---
title: "Monitor Linux Kernel Modules"
weight: 1
icon: "overview"
description: "Monitor Linux Kernel Modules operations"
---

> # Monitoring Kernel Modules operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Monitoring Kernel Modules operations
```

to the operating system, to alter host system functionality or even hide their behaviour. This
can be used to answer the following questions:

> Which process or container is changing the kernel?

> Which process or container is loading or unloading kernel modules in the cuslter?

> Which process or container requested a feature that triggered the kernel to automatically load a module?

> If the kernel modules being loaded are signed?

## Monitor Loading kernel modules

### Kubernetes Environments

After deploying Tetragon, use the [monitor-kernel-modules](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-kernel-modules.yaml) tracing policy which generates [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) events
to trace kernel module operations.

Apply the [monitor-kernel-modules](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-kernel-modules.yaml) tracing policy:
```shell-session
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-kernel-modules.yaml
```

> Then we start monitoring for events with `tetra` cli:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then start monitoring for events with `tetra` CLI:
```

```shell-session
kubectl exec -it -n kube-system ds/tetragon -c tetragon -- tetra getevents
```

When loading an out of tree module named `kernel_module_hello.ko` with the command `insmod`,

> `tetra` cli will generate the following [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) events:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`tetra` CLI will generate the following [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) events:
```

      "refcnt": 1,
      "tid": 82023
    },
    "parent": {
      "exec_id": "OjEzMTg4MTM4MjY2ODQyOjgyMDIy",
      "pid": 82022,
      "uid": 1000,
      "cwd": "/home/tixxdz/tetragon",
      "binary": "/usr/bin/sudo",
      "arguments": "insmod contrib/tester-progs/kernel_module_hello.ko",
      "flags": "execve",
      "start_time": "2023-08-30T11:01:22.844332959Z",
      "auid": 1000,
      "parent_exec_id": "OjEzMTg1NTE3MTgzNDM0OjgyMDIx",
      "refcnt": 1,
      "tid": 0
    },
    "function_name": "do_init_module",
    "args": [
      {
        "module_arg": {
          "name": "kernel_module_hello",
          "tainted": [
            "TaintOutOfTreeModule",
            "TaintUnsignedModule"
          ]
        }
      }
    ],
    "action": "KPROBE_ACTION_POST"
  },
  "time": "2023-08-30T11:01:22.847638990Z"
}
```

This [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) event contains:

- `do_init_module`: the function call where the module is finaly loaded.
- [`module_arg`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#kernelmodule" >}}): the kernel module information, it contains:
  - `name`: the name of the kernel module as a string.

>   - [`tainted`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#taintedbitstype" >}}): the module tainted flags that will be applied on the kernel. Here it indicates we are loading an out of tree module, and an unsigned module which may compromise the integrity of our system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [`tainted`]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#taintedbitstype" >}}): the module tainted flags that will be applied on the kernel. In the example above, it indicates we are loading an out-of-tree module, that is unsigned which may compromise the integrity of our system.
```

</p>
</details>

## Monitor Kernel Modules Signature

Kernels compiled with [`CONFIG_MODULE_SIG`](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/module-signing.html) option will check if the modules being loaded were cryptographically signed.
This allows to assert that:

* If the module being loaded is signed, the kernel has its key and the signature verification succeeded.

> * If the integrity of the system or the kernel was not compromised.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The integrity of the system or the kernel was not compromised.
```

to identify if kernel modules are signed or not.

Apply the [monitor-signed-kernel-modules](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-signed-kernel-modules.yaml) tracing policy:
```shell-session
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/examples/tracingpolicy/host-changes/monitor-signed-kernel-modules.yaml
```

Before going forward, deploy the [`test-pod`](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/testdata/specs/testpod.yaml) into the demo-app namespace, which has its security context set to privileged.
This allows to run the demo by mountig an `xfs` file system inside the `test-pod` which requires privileges,
but will also trigger an automatic `xfs` module loading operation.

{{< note >}}
This was tested on an Ubuntu host.
{{< /note >}}

```shell-session
kubectl create namespace demo-app
kubectl apply -n demo-app -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/tetragon/main/testdata/specs/testpod.yaml
```

> Start monitoring for events with `tetra` cli:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start monitoring for events with `tetra` CLI:
```

      "uid": 0,
      "cwd": "/",
      "binary": "/bin/sh",
      "flags": "execve rootcwd clone",
      "start_time": "2023-09-09T23:27:30.202263472Z",
      "auid": 4294967295,
      "pod": {
        "namespace": "demo-app",
        "name": "test-pod",
        "container": {
          "id": "containerd://1e910d5cc8d8d68c894934170b162ef93aea5652867ed6bd7c620c7e3f9a10f1",
          "name": "test-pod",
          "image": {
            "id": "docker.io/cilium/starwars@sha256:f92c8cd25372bac56f55111469fe9862bf682385a4227645f5af155eee7f58d9",
            "name": "docker.io/cilium/starwars:latest"
          },
          "start_time": "2023-09-09T22:46:09Z",
          "pid": 45612
        },
        "workload": "test-pod"
      },
      "docker": "1e910d5cc8d8d68c894934170b162ef",
      "parent_exec_id": "a2luZC1jb250cm9sLXBsYW5lOjQxMjYyOTEwMjM3OTQ2OjEzMDgwMA==",
      "tid": 130809
    },
    "function_name": "security_kernel_module_request",
    "args": [
      {
        "string_arg": "fs-xfs"
      }
    ],
    "return": {
      "int_arg": 0
    },
    "action": "KPROBE_ACTION_POST"
  },
  "node_name": "kind-control-plane",
  "time": "2023-09-09T23:27:42.751151233Z"
}
```

> In addition to the process metadata from exec events, [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) event contain the arguments of the observed call. In the above case they are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the process metadata from exec events, [ProcessKprobe]({{< ref "/docs/reference/grpc-api#processkprobe" >}}) event contains the arguments of the observed call. In the above case they are:
```

- `security_kernel_module_request`: the kernel security hook where modules are loaded on-demand.

> - `string_arg`: the name of the kernel module. When modules are automatically loaded the kernel for security reasons
>   prefix the module with the name of the subsystem that requested it, here it is from file system subsystem hence the name is `fs-xfs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `string_arg`: the name of the kernel module. When modules are automatically loaded, for security reasons, 
   the kernel prefixes the module with the name of the subsystem that requested it. In our case, it's requested
   by the file system subsystem, hence the name is `fs-xfs`.
```

      "pid": 249175,
      "uid": 0,
      "cwd": "/home/tixxdz/tetragon",
      "binary": "/usr/sbin/rmmod",
      "arguments": "kernel_module_hello",
      "flags": "execve clone",
      "start_time": "2023-08-30T16:44:03.471068355Z",
      "auid": 1000,
      "parent_exec_id": "OjMzNzQ4NzY0MjQ4MTY5OjI0OTE3NA==",
      "refcnt": 1,
      "tid": 249175
    },
    "parent": {
      "exec_id": "OjMzNzQ4NzY0MjQ4MTY5OjI0OTE3NA==",
      "pid": 249174,
      "uid": 1000,
      "cwd": "/home/tixxdz/tetragon",
      "binary": "/usr/bin/sudo",
      "arguments": "rmmod kernel_module_hello",
      "flags": "execve",
      "start_time": "2023-08-30T16:44:03.470314558Z",
      "auid": 1000,
      "parent_exec_id": "OjMzNzQ2MjA5OTUxODI4OjI0OTE3Mw==",
      "refcnt": 1,
      "tid": 0
    },
    "function_name": "free_module",
    "args": [
      {
        "module_arg": {
          "name": "kernel_module_hello",
          "tainted": [
            "TaintOutOfTreeModule",
            "TaintUnsignedModule"
          ]
        }
      }
    ],
    "action": "KPROBE_ACTION_POST"
  },
  "time": "2023-08-30T16:44:03.471984676Z"
}
```

</p>
</details>

{{< note >}}

> Please note that some rootkits that are kernel modules may hide themselves by deleting their
> entries from the kernel internal module lists while continuing to run in the background.
> Monitoring module load operations allows to detect such cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that some kernel module rootkits hide themselves by deleting their
entries from the kernel internal module lists while continuing to run in the background.
Monitoring module load operations allows to detect such cases.
```
